Add extensions architecture section (#16289)
docker/docs: desktop/extensions-sdk/architecture/index.md

---
title: Extension architecture
description: Docker extension architecture
keywords: Docker, extensions, sdk, metadata
---

Extensions are applications that run inside the Docker Desktop. They're packaged as Docker images, distributed
through Docker Hub, and installed by users either through the Marketplace within Docker Desktop Dashboard or the
Docker Extensions CLI.

Extensions can be composed of 3 (optional) components:
- a frontend (or User Interface): a web application displayed in a tab of the dashboard in Docker Desktop
- a backend: one or many containerised services running in the Docker Desktop VM
- executables: shell scripts or binaries that Docker Desktop copies on the host when installing the extension

![Overview](./images/overview.svg)

An extension doesn't necessarily need to have all these components, but at least one of them depending on the extension features. 
To configure and run those components, Docker Desktop uses a `metadata.json` file. See the

> [metadata section](./metadata) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[metadata](./metadata) section for more details.
```

## The frontend

The frontend, is basically a web application made from HTML, Javascript, and CSS. It can be built with a simple HTML
file, some vanilla Javascript or any frontend framework, such as React or Vue.js.

When Docker Desktop installs the extension, it extracts the UI folder from the extension image, as defined by the `ui` section in the `metadata.json`. See the [ui metadata section](./metadata.md#ui) for more details.

> Every time the users click on the extension tab, Docker Desktop starts the UI. When they close the tab, the UI is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every time users click on the **Extensions** tab, Docker Desktop starts the UI. When they close the tab, the UI is
```

not running anymore.

The frontend can invoke `docker` commands, communicate with the extension backend, or invoke extension executables

> deployed on the host, via [the Extension SDK](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@docker/extension-api-client).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deployed on the host, through the [Extensions SDK](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@docker/extension-api-client){: target="_blank" rel="noopener" class="_"}.
```

	service, for example:
- run long-running processes that must outlive the frontend
- store data in a local database and serve them back with a REST API
- store the extension state, like when a button starts a long-running process, so that if you navigate away
  from the extension and come back, the frontend can pick up where it left off
- accessing specific resources in the Docker Desktop VM, for example by mounting folders in the compose
file

> **Tip**
>
> The `docker extension init` generates a Go backend. But you can still use it as a starting point for
> your own extension and use any other language like Node.js, Python, Java, .Net, or any other language and framework.
{: .tip }

Usually, the backend is made of one container that runs within the Docker Desktop VM. Internally, Docker Desktop creates
a Docker Compose project, creates the container from the `image` option of the `vm` section of the `metadata.json`, and

> attaches it to the composer project. See the [ui metadata section](./metadata.md#vm) for more details.

Reviewer: >attaches it to the composer project.

Should this be Compose project?

Author: Indeed! Well spotted thank you :)

> attaches it to the composer project. See the [ui metadata section](./metadata.md#vm) for more details.

Author: ```suggestion
attaches it to the Compose project. See the [ui metadata section](./metadata.md#vm) for more details.
```
```suggestion
attaches it to the composer project. See the [ui metadata section](./metadata.md#vm) for more details.
```

> In many situations, extension backend services can be defined by using the same image also used to package the extension.

Author: Added here https://github.com/docker/docs/pull/16289/files#r1044486686

> This image must then have a defined `CMD` to start the backend service, in addition to `COPY` lines for the extension packaging.

Author: I copied that from the content of the old metadata page.

I think that this sentence tries to explain how to package the extension so that the same image contains the UI files and the backend binaries, and once run, it runs the backend service.
How would you rephrase that to make it more straightforward?

To ease version management, you can reuse the same image for the extension packaging and for the backend service and
push it on Docker Hub.

In some cases, a `composefile` can be used instead of an `image`. This is useful when the backend container
needs more specific options, such as mounting volumes or requesting [capabilities](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/run/#runtime-privilege-and-linux-capabilities)
that can't be expressed just with a Docker image. The `composefile` can also be used to add multiple containers

> needed by the extension, like a database or a message broker.

Author: ```suggestion
needed by the extension, like a database or a message broker. 
Note that, if the Compose file defines many services, the SDK can only contact the first of them.
```

> **Note**
>
> In some cases, it is useful to also interact with the Docker engine from the backend.
> See [how to use the Docker socket](../guides/use-docker-socket-from-backend.md) from the backend.

To communicate with the backend, the Extension SDK provides [functions](../dev/api/backend.md#get) to make `GET`,
`POST`, `PUT`, and `DELETE` requests from the frontend. Under the hood, the communication is done through a socket
or named pipe, depending on the operating system. If the backend was listening to a port, it would be difficult to
prevent collision with other applications running on the host or in a container already. Also, some users are
running Docker Desktop in constrained environments where they can't open ports on their machines.

![Backend and frontend communication](./images/frontend-backend.svg)

> Finally, the backend can be build with any technology, as long as it can run in a container and listen on a socket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the backend can be built with any technology, as long as it can run in a container and listen on a socket.
```

Learn more about [adding a backend](../build/set-up/backend-extension-tutorial.md) to your extension.

## Executables

In addition to the frontend and the backend, extensions can also contain executables. Executables are binaries or shell scripts
that are installed on the host when the extension is installed. The frontend can invoke them with [the extension SDK](../dev/api/backend.md#invoke-an-extension-binary-on-the-host).

These executables are useful when the extension needs to interact with a third-party CLI tool, like AWS, `kubectl`, etc.
Shipping those executables with the extension ensure that the CLI tool is always available, at the right version, on
the users' machine.

> When Docker Desktop installed the extension, it copies the executables on the host as defined by the `host` section in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Docker Desktop installs the extension, it copies the executables on the host as defined by the `host` section in
```

---
title: Extension architecture
description: Docker extension architecture
keywords: Docker, extensions, sdk, metadata
---

Extensions are applications that run inside the Docker Desktop. They're packaged as Docker images, distributed
through Docker Hub, and installed by users either through the Marketplace within Docker Desktop Dashboard or the
Docker Extensions CLI.

> Extensions contain 3 components:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Extensions can be composed of 3 (optional) components:
```

> - a frontend, the UI, is a web application accessible from a tab to the dashboard in Docker Desktop

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- a frontend (or User Interface): a web application displayed in a tab of the dashboard in Docker Desktop
```

> - a backend, that's one or many containerised services running on the Docker Desktop VM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- a backend: one or many containerised services running in the Docker Desktop VM
```

> - executables, are shell scripts or binaries, that Docker Desktop copies on the host when installing the extension

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- executables: shell scripts or binaries that Docker Desktop copies on the host when installing the extension
```

![Overview](./images/overview.png)

> An extension doesn't necessarily need to have all these components, but at least one of them depending on what the
> extension provides. To configure and run those components, Docker Desktop uses a `metadata.json` file. See the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An extension doesn't necessarily need to have all these components, but at least one of them depending on the extension features. 
To configure and run those components, Docker Desktop uses a `metadata.json` file. See the
```

[metadata section](./metadata) for more details.

## The frontend

The frontend, is basically a web application made from HTML, Javascript, and CSS. It can be built with a simple HTML
file, some vanilla Javascript or any frontend framework, such as React or Vue.js.

> When Docker Desktop installed the extension, it copies the content of the extension image to the host, as defined by
> the `ui` section in the `metadata.json`. See the [ui metadata section](./metadata.md#ui) for more details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When Docker Desktop installs the extension, it extract the UI folder from the extension image, as defined by
the `ui` section in the `metadata.json`. See the [ui metadata section](./metadata.md#ui) for more details.
```

Author: ```suggestion
When Docker Desktop installs the extension, it extracts the UI folder from the extension image, as defined by the `ui` section in the `metadata.json`. See the [ui metadata section](./metadata.md#ui) for more details.
```

Every time the users click on the extension tab, Docker Desktop starts the UI. When they close the tab, the UI is
not running anymore.

> The frontend is able to invoke `docker` commands, to communicate with the backend, and to invoke executables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The frontend can to invoke `docker` commands, communicate with the extension backend, or invoke extension executables
```

deployed on the host, via [the Extension SDK](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@docker/extension-api-client).

> **Tip**
>
> The `docker extension init` generates a React based extension. But you can still use it as a starting point for
> your own extension and use any other frontend framework, like Vue, Angular, Svelte, etc. or event stay with
> vanilla Javascript.
{: .tip }

Learn more about [building a frontend](../build/set-up/frontend-extension-tutorial.md) for your extension.

## The backend

> Alongside a frontend application, extensions can also contain a backend service. Usually, the Extension
> SDK is enough to manipulate Docker resources. However, there are some cases when an extension requires a backend
> service, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alongside a frontend application, extensions can also contain a backend service. In many case, the Extension does not need a backend, and features can be implemented just by invoking docker commands through the SDK. However, there are some cases when an extension requires a backend
service, for example:
```

Author: ```suggestion
Alongside a frontend application, extensions can also contain a backend service. In many cases, the Extension does not need a backend, and features can be implemented just by invoking docker commands through the SDK. However, there are some cases when an extension requires a backend
	service, for example:
```

- run long-running processes that must outlive the frontend
- store data in a local database and serve them back with a REST API
- store the extension state, like when a button starts a long-running process, so that if you navigate away
  from the extension and come back, the frontend can pick up where it left off
- accessing specific resources in the Docker Desktop VM, for example by mounting folders in the compose
file

> **Tip**
>
> The `docker extension init` generates a Go backend. But you can still use it as a starting point for
> your own extension and use any other language like Node.js, Python, Java, .Net, or any other language and framework.
{: .tip }

Usually, the backend is made of one container that runs within the Docker Desktop VM. Internally, Docker Desktop creates

> a Docker Compose project, create the container from the `image` option of the `vm` section of the `metadata.json`, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a Docker Compose project, creates the container from the `image` option of the `vm` section of the `metadata.json`, and
```

needs more specific options, such as mounting volumes or requesting [capabilities](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/run/#runtime-privilege-and-linux-capabilities)
that can't be expressed just with a Docker image. The `composefile` can also be used to add multiple containers
needed by the extension, like a database or a message broker.

> **Note**
>
> In some cases, it is useful to also interact with the Docker engine from the backend.
> See [how to use the Docker socket](../guides/use-docker-socket-from-backend.md) from the backend.

To communicate with the backend, the Extension SDK provides [functions](../dev/api/backend.md#get) to make `GET`,
`POST`, `PUT`, and `DELETE` requests from the frontend. Under the hood, the communication is done through a socket
or named pipe, depending on the operating system. If the backend was listening to a port, it would be difficult to
prevent collision with other applications running on the host or in a container already. Also, some users are
running Docker Desktop in constrained environments where they can't open ports on their machines.

![Backend and frontend communication](./images/frontend-backend.png)

> Finally, the backend can be build with any technology of your choice, as long as it can run in a container and
> listen to socket or named pipe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, the backend can be build with any technology, as long as it can run in a container and listen on a socket.
```

Named pipes are used on the host side, but extension developers never have to use them directly

Learn more about [adding a backend](../build/set-up/backend-extension-tutorial.md) to your extension.

## Executables

> In addition to the frontend and the backend, extensions can also contain executables. Executables are shell scripts
> that are installed on the host when the extension is installed. The frontend can invoke them with [the extension SDK](../dev/api/backend.md#invoke-an-extension-binary-on-the-host).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the frontend and the backend, extensions can also contain executables. Executables are binaries or shell scripts
that are installed on the host when the extension is installed. The frontend can invoke them with [the extension SDK](../dev/api/backend.md#invoke-an-extension-binary-on-the-host).
```

These executables are useful when the extension needs to interact with a third-party CLI tool, like AWS, `kubectl`, etc.
Shipping those executables with the extension ensure that the CLI tool is always available, at the right version, on
the users' machine.

When Docker Desktop installed the extension, it copies the executables on the host as defined by the `host` section in
the `metadata.json`. See the [ui metadata section](./metadata.md#host) for more details.

![Executable and frontend communication](./images/frontend-executables.png)

However, since they're executed on the users' machine, they have to be available to the platform they're running on.

> For example, if you want to ship the `kubectl` executable, you need to provide a different version for Windows, Mac,
> and Linux.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if you want to ship the `kubectl` executable, you need to provide a different version for Windows, Mac,
and Linux. Multi arch images will also need to include binaries built for the right arch (AMD / ARM)
```
